hey this is pressure Locker mathematical
induction is a powerful proof technique
involving two steps step one prove a
statement is true for the base case
usually N equals zero or N equals 1 step
2 prove that if the statement holds for
some natural number n then the statement
also holds for n plus 1
this creates a logical domino which then
proves that the same and holds for all
natural numbers let's do an example to
prove that the sum of the first n odd
numbers is equal to M Squared we start
with the base case of the first odd
number it is true that 1 is equal to 1
squared we now assume the formula is
true for N and then we want to show that
it is also true for n plus 1 the next
odd number which will be 2 larger which
will then be 2 n plus 1 how can we prove
this formula will also have the same
form we start out with the sum of the
first n odd numbers and we know that is
equal to N squared by the inductive
hypothesis we have the sum of the first
n plus 1 odd numbers is therefore equal
to n queered plus 2 n plus 1 we can now
factor n squared plus 2 n plus 1 to get
n plus 1 the quantity squared and this
shows the formula also hold for the next
odd number therefore we have proven the
statement by induction will now get to
the thing I want to show you in this
video which is we will prove that in
every group size n everyone has the same
age this will be a false proof but we're
going to proceed by induction and the
challenge for you is to figure out where
the mistake in this proof is step 1 in a
group of size N equals 1 there is only
one
everyone in this group trivially has the
same age therefore we have checked the
base case of N equals one now we will
show whenever the statement is true for
a group of size n it will also be true
for a group of size n plus one consider
a group with n plus one people that we
will number from one to n plus one if we
remove person n plus one from the group
then the remaining set of people from 1
to n is a group of n people by the
induction hypothesis everyone in this
group has the same age similarly if we
remove person one then the remaining set
of people from 2 to n plus one is also a
group of n people once again by the
induction hypothesis everyone in this
group has the same age by steps four and
five persons n and n plus one have the
same age as everyone else in the group
numbered from 1 to n minus one and
therefore they have the same age as each
other this means everyone in the group
has the same age by induction we
approved everyone has the same age for
groups of any size therefore everyone in
the world has the same age naturally
this is an absurd conclusion so the
question is which step has the mistake
can you figure it out give it a moment
of thought before watching the rest of
the video
so each step in this proof is valid
except for set six it is not true that
person's n and n plus one will have the
same age even though they could have the
same age as everyone else in the group
why is that the statement is not always
true with the group of just two people
consider a group with one and two if we
remove person one from the group then
everyone remaining which is just person
to that person does have the same age
and if you remove person too then every
one remaining which is just one also has
with same age however just because
everyone else remaining has the same age
does not mean that one in two will have
the same age as each other person one
may have the age of one and person two
may have the age of two so this is the
law in this proof that it will not work
when N equals two and therefore the
induction domino effect doesn't happen
we can't they therefore then true for
three and four and so on so clearly not
everyone in the world has the same age
induction is a powerful proof technique
but each step has to be valid or you may
end up with an absurd conclusion did you
figure it out thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math and game theory you
can catch you on my blog my ear
decisions that you can follow on
Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch me on social media at pressure
Locker and if you liked this video
please check out my books there are
links in the video description